Add 365 release notes (#10145)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-365.md

# Release 365 (XX Dec 2021)

## General

* Add support for [`TRUNCATE TABLE`](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Add support for time travel queries. ({issue}`8773`)

> * Add {func}`contains` to check whether a CIDR contains an IP address. ({issue}`9654`)

Reviewer: `` {func}`contains` `` goes to array function.

* Report connector metrics in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`9858`)
* Allow executing ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE`` statements on tables restricted with a row filter. ({issue}`8856`)
* Improve performance of inequality joins. ({issue}`9307`)

> * Improve join performance for joins with small build side. ({issue}`9851`)

Reviewer 2: WDYT for consistency with previous point.
```suggestion
* Improve performance of joins with small build side. ({issue}`9851`)
```

> * Make query final statistics more accurate. ({issue}`9888`, `9913`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Make query final statistics more accurate. ({issue}`9888`, {issue}`9913`)
```

* Improve query planning performance for queries containing large `IN` predicates. ({issue}`9874`)

> * Fix incorrect results when casting bigint values to bounded varchar type. ({issue}`552`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fix incorrect results when casting ``BIGINT`` values to bounded ``VARCHAR`` type. ({issue}`552`)
```

* Fix ``PREPARE`` statements for ``DROP/INSERT`` when table or schema name contains special characters. ({issue}`9823`)
* Fix minor memory leak when queries are abandoned during the initial query submission phase. ({issue}`9962`)

## Security

* Allow configuring HTTP proxy for OAuth2 authentication. ({issue}`9920`, {issue}`10069`)
* Add group-based and owner-based query access rules to file based system access control. ({issue}`9811`)
* Use internal names for discovery client when automatic TLS is enabled for internal communications. This allows `discovery.uri` 
  to be configured using a normal DNS name like `https://coordinator.trino`, and still use automatic TLS certificates. ({issue}`9821`)
* Fix internal communication automatic TLS on Java 17. ({issue}`9821`)

## BigQuery connector

> * Support reading `bignumeric` type whose precision is less than or equal to 38. ({issue}`9882`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support reading ``BIGNUMERIC`` type whose precision is less than or equal to 38. ({issue}`9882`)
```

Author: We've been using lower case to refer to data types

* Fix failure when a schema is dropped during listing tables. ({issue}`9954`)

## Cassandra connector

* Support reading user defined types in Cassandra. ({issue}`147`)

## ClickHouse connector

> * Add support for truncating tables. ({issue}`8921`)

Reviewer 2: Should all truncating tables entries link to `sql/truncate`?

* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Druid connector

* Add support for truncating tables. ({issue}`8921`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Add support for additional Elastic Cloud node roles. ({issue}`9892`)
* Fix failure when empty values exist in numeric fields. ({issue}`9939`)

## Hive connector

* Allow reading empty files. ({issue}`9929`)
* Improve performance of decimal ``avg`` aggregation. ({issue}`9738`)
* Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)

> * Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, `9869`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, {issue}`9869`)
```

* Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files. ({issue}`9979`)
* Fix reporting of ORC files read bytes. ({issue}`10048`)

> * Fix reading of Parquet files with column indexes. ({issue}`10076`)

Reviewer 2: Should this be collapse with `Fix failure when reading Parquet data if column indexes are enabled. ({issue}`9890`)`?

* Account memory used for tracking information about deleted rows when reading from Hive ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)
* Fix bug that skips writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)
* Fix incorrect rows being deleted when deleting from transactional table that has original files. ({issue}`10095`)
* Fix delete and update failure when changing a table after a major compaction. ({issue}`10120`)
* Fix incorrect results when decoding decimal values in Parquet reader. ({issue}`9971`)
* Fix ``hive.dynamic-filtering.wait-timeout`` not having any effect. ({issue}`10106`)
* Fix failure when reading Parquet data if column indexes are enabled. ({issue}`9890`)

## Iceberg connector

* Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)
* Improve query performance for certain queries with complex predicates. ({issue}`9309`)
* Reduce resource consumption and create bigger files when writing to an Iceberg table with partitioning. Bigger files are more efficient to query later. ({issue}`9826`)

> * Use ZSTD by default. ({issue}`10058`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Use ZSTD compression by default. ({issue}`10058`)
```

# Release 365 (XX Dec 2021)

## General

* Add support for [`TRUNCATE TABLE`](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

> * Add support for time travel queries. ({issue}`8773`)

Reviewer 3: Maybe use example of actual syntax instead of saying `time travel queries`? Is that a generally used term?

Reviewer 3: Also is that supported by some connectors already. If not I am not sure it is worth mentioning.

Author: That's the common way to refer to that kind of queries across databases that support that kind of feature.

> Also is that supported by some connectors already. If not I am not sure it is worth mentioning.

It's not, but if someone implements their own connector, they can take advantage of the functionality.

Reviewer 4: Can we link to the docs? Can we list what connectors support that?

Author: No connectors support that yet, but the capability now exists in the engine for any connector that wants to take advantage of it (including third-party connectors not shipped with Trino)

* Add [`contains`](ip_address_contains) function to check whether a CIDR contains an IP address. ({issue}`9654`)
* Report connector metrics in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`9858`)

> * Report operator input distribution in ``EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE``. ({issue}`10133`)

Reviewer 3: input size distribution

Author: Size or row count? cc @sopel39

Reviewer 5: it's about positions count, not size.
Maybe: ```Report operator input positions distribution ...`?

* Allow executing ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE`` statements on tables restricted with a row filter. ({issue}`8856`)
* Improve performance of inequality joins. ({issue}`9307`)

> * Improve performance of joins with small build side. ({issue}`9851`)

Reviewer 3: with a small?

Author: Actually, I'm going to rephrase it as: "Improve performance of joins involving a small table on one side". The notion of "build side" is not something that users generally understand.

> * Improve CPU utilization by adjusting ``task.concurrency`` automatically for number of physical cores. ({issue}`10088`)

Reviewer 3: `Improve CPU utilization by adjusting ``task.concurrency`` automatically based on the number of physical cores`

* Make query final statistics more accurate. ({issue}`9888`, {issue}`9913`)
* Improve query planning performance for queries containing large `IN` predicates. ({issue}`9874`)
* Fix incorrect results when casting `bigint` values to `varchar(n)` type. ({issue}`552`)

> * Fix ``PREPARE`` statements for ``DROP/INSERT`` when table or schema name contains special characters. ({issue}`9823`)

Reviewer 3: Fix  query failure when ``PREPARE`` statement is used with ``DROP/INSERT`` when table or schema name contains special characters

  to be configured using a normal DNS name like `https://coordinator.trino`, and still use automatic TLS certificates. ({issue}`9821`)
* Use Kerberos operating system ticket cache if keytab file is not provided in JDBC and CLI for Kerberos authentication. ({issue}`8987`)
* Fix internal communication automatic TLS on Java 17. ({issue}`9821`)

## BigQuery connector

* Support reading `bignumeric` type whose precision is less than or equal to 38. ({issue}`9882`)
* Fix failure when a schema is dropped during listing tables. ({issue}`9954`)

## Cassandra connector

* Support reading user defined types in Cassandra. ({issue}`147`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Druid connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Add support for additional Elastic Cloud node roles. ({issue}`9892`)
* Fix failure when empty values exist in numeric fields. ({issue}`9939`)

## Hive connector

> * Allow reading empty files. ({issue}`9929`)

Reviewer 3: so this was failing previously? Or we just wasted some time on processing useless splits?

Author: cc @Praveen2112

Reviewer 6: This is actually two changes:

* Allow reading empty files of type Parquet, RCFile, SequenceFile. (and maybe Avro ... previously allowed for ORC and textual formats)
* Improve performance by not generating splits for empty files.

* Improve performance of decimal ``avg`` aggregation. ({issue}`9738`)
* Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)
* Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, {issue}`9869`)
* Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files. ({issue}`9979`)

> * Fix reporting of ORC files read bytes. ({issue}`10048`)

Reviewer 3: `Fix reporting of number of read bytes for tables using ``ORC`` file format`?

* Account memory used for tracking information about deleted rows when reading from Hive ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)
* Fix bug that skips writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)

> * Fix incorrect rows being deleted when deleting from transactional table that has original files. ({issue}`10095`)

Reviewer 3: `Fix bug where incorrect rows were deleted when deleting from a transactional table that has original files (before first major compaction)`?

> # Release 365 (XX Dec 2021)

Reviewer 7: date reminder

## General

* Add support for [`TRUNCATE TABLE`](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Add support for time travel queries. ({issue}`8773`)
* Add [`contains`](ip_address_contains) function to check whether a CIDR contains an IP address. ({issue}`9654`)
* Report connector metrics in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`9858`)
* Report operator input distribution in ``EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE``. ({issue}`10133`)
* Allow executing ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE`` statements on tables restricted with a row filter. ({issue}`8856`)
* Remove `owner` column from the `metadata.materialized_views` table. ({issue}`9961`) 
* Improve performance of inequality joins. ({issue}`9307`)
* Improve performance of joins involving a small table on one side. ({issue}`9851`)
* Improve CPU utilization by adjusting ``task.concurrency`` automatically based on the number of physical cores. ({issue}`10088`)
* Make query final statistics more accurate. ({issue}`9888`, {issue}`9913`)
* Improve query planning performance for queries containing large `IN` predicates. ({issue}`9874`)
* Fix incorrect results when casting `bigint` values to `varchar(n)` type. ({issue}`552`)

> * Fix query failure when `PREPARE` statement is used with `DROP` or `INSERT` when table or schema name 

Reviewer 7: nit: `.` at the end

Reviewer 7: Also, how about the following (also refer to issue instead of pr)

```
Fix query failure for the `PREPARE` statement, when it is used with `DROP` or `INSERT` 
statements, and the table or schema name contains special characters. ({issue}`9822`)
```

Author: I adjusted the phrasing a bit based on your suggestion.

  contains special characters ({issue}`9823`)
* Fix minor memory leak when queries are abandoned during the initial query submission phase. ({issue}`9962`)

## Security

* Allow configuring HTTP proxy for OAuth2 authentication. ({issue}`9920`, {issue}`10069`)
* Add group-based and owner-based query access rules to file based system access control. ({issue}`9811`)
* Use internal names for discovery client when automatic TLS is enabled for internal communications. This allows `discovery.uri` 
  to be configured using a normal DNS name like `https://coordinator.trino`, and still use automatic TLS certificates. ({issue}`9821`)

> * Use Kerberos operating system ticket cache if keytab file is not provided in JDBC and CLI for Kerberos authentication. ({issue}`8987`)

Reviewer 7: may be `provided in --> provided to`?

* Fix internal communication automatic TLS on Java 17. ({issue}`9821`)

## BigQuery connector

* Support reading `bignumeric` type whose precision is less than or equal to 38. ({issue}`9882`)

> * Fix failure when a schema is dropped during listing tables. ({issue}`9954`)

Reviewer 7: `while listing tables` OR `during table listing`?

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Druid connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Add support for additional Elastic Cloud node roles. ({issue}`9892`)
* Fix failure when empty values exist in numeric fields. ({issue}`9939`)

## Hive connector

* Allow reading empty files. ({issue}`9929`)
* Improve performance of decimal ``avg`` aggregation. ({issue}`9738`)
* Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)
* Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, {issue}`9869`)
* Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files. ({issue}`9979`)
* Fix reporting of number of read bytes for tables using ``ORC`` file format. ({issue}`10048`)
* Account memory used for tracking information about deleted rows when reading from Hive ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)
* Fix bug that skips writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)

> * Fix bug where incorrect rows were deleted when deleting from a transactional table that has original files (before first major compaction). ({issue}`10095`)

Reviewer 7: `before the first`

                                
## MongoDB connector

* Support connecting to MongoDB clusters via `mongodb.connection-url` config property. `mongodb.seeds` and `mongodb.credentials` properties are now deprecated. ({issue}`9819`)

## MySQL connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Oracle connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Phoenix connector

* Support reading ``DECIMAL`` columns from Phoenix with unspecified precision or scale. ({issue}`9795`)
* Fix query failures when reading Phoenix tables. ({issue}`9151`)

## Pinot connector

* Update Pinot connector to be compatible with versions >= 0.8.0 and drop support for older versions. ({issue}`9098`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Redshift connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## SQL Server connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## SPI

> * Collect connector metrics after page source ``ConnectorPageSource`` is closed. ({issue}`9615`)

Reviewer 7: `page source` seems redundant

# Release 365 (3 Dec 2021)

## General

* Add support for [`TRUNCATE TABLE`](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Add support for aggregate functions in row pattern recognition context. ({issue}`8738`)
* Add support for time travel queries. ({issue}`8773`)

> * Add support for spilling aggregations containing `ORDER BY` or `DISTINCT` clauses. ({issue}`9723`)

Reviewer 4: Does it have any session or config toggles?

Author: Yes, but it's enabled by default.

* Add [`contains`](ip_address_contains) function to check whether a CIDR contains an IP address. ({issue}`9654`)

> * Report connector metrics in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`9858`)

Reviewer 4: What is connector metrics?

Author: Custom metrics exposed by connectors.

* Support reading user defined types in Cassandra. ({issue}`147`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Druid connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Add support for additional Elastic Cloud node roles. ({issue}`9892`)
* Fix failure when empty values exist in numeric fields. ({issue}`9939`)

## Hive connector

* Allow reading empty files. ({issue}`9929`)
* Improve performance of decimal ``avg`` aggregation. ({issue}`9738`)
* Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)
* Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, {issue}`9869`)
* Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files. ({issue}`9979`)
* Fix reporting of number of read bytes for tables using ``ORC`` file format. ({issue}`10048`)
* Account memory used for tracking information about deleted rows when reading from Hive ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)

> * Fix `REVOKE GRANT OPTION` to revoke only the granting instead of revoking entire privilege. ({issue}`10094`)

Reviewer 4: > to revoke only the granting

This does not sound clear. Maybe 
> to revoke only the `GRANT OPTION` from the privilege?

* Fix bug that skips writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)

> * Fix bug where incorrect rows were deleted when deleting from a transactional table that has original files (before the first major compaction). ({issue}`10095`)

Reviewer 4: This sounds serious. Should we put it to the top and some emphasise it?

Author: We normally list changes in order of:
* new features
* performance improvements
* bug fixes

Not sure where we would put this to make it more prominent.

* Fix delete and update failure when changing a table after a major compaction. ({issue}`10120`)
* Fix incorrect results when decoding decimal values in Parquet reader. ({issue}`9971`)

> * Fix ``hive.dynamic-filtering.wait-timeout`` not having any effect. ({issue}`10106`)

Reviewer 4: I don't get it? Does it mean that previously that flag was not effective? Can we improve wording?

> Fix ``....`` to be effective, previously flag was ignored.
?

Author: cc @raunaqmorarka @sopel39

Author: As far as I understanding, it wasn't being ignored, but there was a bug in the implementation.

# Release 365 (3 Dec 2021)

## General

* Add support for [`TRUNCATE TABLE`](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Add support for aggregate functions in row pattern recognition context. ({issue}`8738`)
* Add support for time travel queries. ({issue}`8773`)
* Add support for spilling aggregations containing `ORDER BY` or `DISTINCT` clauses. ({issue}`9723`)
* Add [`contains`](ip_address_contains) function to check whether a CIDR contains an IP address. ({issue}`9654`)
* Report connector metrics in `EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`9858`)
* Report operator input row count distribution in ``EXPLAIN ANALYZE VERBOSE``. ({issue}`10133`)

> * Allow executing ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE`` statements on tables restricted with a row filter. ({issue}`8856`)

Reviewer 6: Single backtick

> * Remove `owner` column from the `metadata.materialized_views` table. ({issue}`9961`)

Reviewer 6: `system.metadata.materialized_views`

* Remove the `optimizer.iterative-rule-based-column-pruning` config property. The legacy column pruning optimizer is no longer available. ({issue}`9564`)
* Improve performance of inequality joins. ({issue}`9307`)
* Improve performance of joins involving a small table on one side. ({issue}`9851`)
* Improve CPU utilization by adjusting ``task.concurrency`` automatically based on the number of physical cores. ({issue}`10088`)

> * Make query final statistics more accurate. ({issue}`9888`, {issue}`9913`)

Reviewer 6: "final query statistics"

* Improve query planning performance for queries containing large `IN` predicates. ({issue}`9874`)
* Reduce peak memory usage for queries involving the `rank`, `dense_rank`, or `row_number` window functions. ({issue}`10056`)
* Fix incorrect results when casting `bigint` values to `varchar(n)` type. ({issue}`552`)

> * Fix query failure when `PREPARE` statement is used with `DROP` or `INSERT` and table or schema name 

Reviewer 6: "when the"
"and the table"
```markdown
* Fix query failure when the `PREPARE` statement is used with `DROP` or `INSERT`
  and the table or schema name contains special characters. ({issue}`9822`)

  contains special characters. ({issue}`9822`)
* Fix minor memory leak when queries are abandoned during the initial query submission phase. ({issue}`9962`)

## Security

* Allow configuring HTTP proxy for OAuth2 authentication. ({issue}`9920`, {issue}`10069`)
* Add group-based and owner-based query access rules to file based system access control. ({issue}`9811`)
* Use internal names for discovery client when automatic TLS is enabled for internal communications. This allows `discovery.uri` 

>   to be configured using a normal DNS name like `https://coordinator.trino`, and still use automatic TLS certificates. ({issue}`9821`)

Reviewer 6: remove comma

* Use Kerberos operating system ticket cache if keytab file is not provided to JDBC and CLI for Kerberos authentication. ({issue}`8987`)
* Fix internal communication automatic TLS on Java 17. ({issue}`9821`)

## CLI

> * Use HTTPS when port is set to 443. ({issue}`8798`)

Reviewer 6: "Automatically use"

## BigQuery connector

* Support reading `bignumeric` type whose precision is less than or equal to 38. ({issue}`9882`)
* Fix failure when a schema is dropped while listing tables. ({issue}`9954`)

## Cassandra connector

* Support reading user defined types in Cassandra. ({issue}`147`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Druid connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Elasticsearch connector

* Add support for additional Elastic Cloud node roles. ({issue}`9892`)
* Fix failure when empty values exist in numeric fields. ({issue}`9939`)

## Hive connector

* Allow reading empty files. ({issue}`9929`)
* Improve performance of decimal ``avg`` aggregation. ({issue}`9738`)

> * Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)

Reviewer 6: Rephrase
```markdown
* Improve performance when reading Parquet files with timestamps encoded using `int64` representation. ({issue}`9414`)

* Improve dynamic partition pruning efficiency. ({issue}`9866`, {issue}`9869`)

> * Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files. ({issue}`9979`)

Reviewer 6: We should probably mention how, since people with high concurrency may need to adjust this down.
```markdown
* Improve query performance on partitioned tables or tables with small files
  by increasing `hive.split-loader-concurrency` from `4` to `64`. ({issue}`9979`)

> * Fix reporting of number of read bytes for tables using ``ORC`` file format. ({issue}`10048`)

Reviewer 6: Single backticks

> * Account memory used for tracking information about deleted rows when reading from Hive ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)

Reviewer 6: Phrasing
```markdown
* Account for memory used for deleted row information when reading from ACID tables. ({issue}`9914`, {issue}`10070`)

> * Fix `REVOKE GRANT OPTION` to revoke only the grant option instead of revoking entire privilege. ({issue}`10094`)

Reviewer 6: "revoking entire privilege" -> "revoking the entire privilege"

> * Fix bug that skips writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)

Reviewer 6: Phrasing
```markdown
* Fix issue that prevented writing bloom filters for ORC files. ({issue}`9792`)

* Fix bug where incorrect rows were deleted when deleting from a transactional table that has original files (before the first major compaction). ({issue}`10095`)
* Fix delete and update failure when changing a table after a major compaction. ({issue}`10120`)
* Fix incorrect results when decoding decimal values in Parquet reader. ({issue}`9971`)

> * Fix ``hive.dynamic-filtering.wait-timeout`` not having any effect. ({issue}`10106`)

Reviewer 6: Single backticks

* Fix failure when reading Parquet data if column indexes are enabled. ({issue}`9890`, {issue}`10076`)

## Iceberg connector

* Add support for storing and reading UUID nested in `row`, `array` or `map` type. ({issue}`9918`)
* Use Iceberg's `schema.name-mapping.default` table property for scanning files

>   with missing Iceberg ids. This aligns Trino behavior on migrated files with the

Reviewer 6: IDs

  Iceberg spec. ({issue}`9959`)
* Use ZSTD compression by default. ({issue}`10058`)
* Add read-only security option which can be enabled by setting the configuration `iceberg.security=read-only`. ({issue}`9974`)
* Change schema of `$partitions` system table to avoid conflicts when table name contains a column named `row_count`, `file_count`
  or `total_size`, or when a column is used for partitioning for part of table data, and it not used for partitioning in some other
  part of the table data. ({issue}`9519`, {issue}`8729`).

> * Improve query performance over Parquet data with timestamp encoded using `int64` representation in Parquet. ({issue}`9414`)

Reviewer 6: Iceberg always stores timestamps this way for Parquet
```markdown
* Improve performance when reading timestamps from Parquet files. ({issue}`9414`)

* Improve query performance for certain queries with complex predicates. ({issue}`9309`)
* Reduce resource consumption and create bigger files when writing to an Iceberg table with partitioning. Bigger files are more efficient to query later. ({issue}`9826`)
* Improve performance for queries on nested data through dereference pushdown. ({issue}`8129`)
* Write correct `file_size_in_bytes` in manifest when creating new ORC files. ({issue}`9810`)

> * Fix query failures that could appear when reading Parquet tables which contained ROW columns that were subject to schema evolution. ({issue}`9264`)

Reviewer 6: "Parquet files" (since a table doesn't necessarily have a specific file format)

> * Fix failure caused by stale metadata in the `rollback_to_snapshot` procedure. ({issue}`9221`)

Reviewer 6: This is the wrong issue. I don't know the right one.

Author: It's https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9921

* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)
                                
## MongoDB connector

* Support connecting to MongoDB clusters via `mongodb.connection-url` config property. `mongodb.seeds` and `mongodb.credentials` properties are now deprecated. ({issue}`9819`)

## MySQL connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Fix incorrect query results when query contains predicates on `real` type columns. ({issue}`9998`)

## Oracle connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## Phoenix connector

* Support reading ``DECIMAL`` columns from Phoenix with unspecified precision or scale. ({issue}`9795`)
* Fix query failures when reading Phoenix tables. ({issue}`9151`)

## Pinot connector

* Update Pinot connector to be compatible with versions >= 0.8.0 and drop support for older versions. ({issue}`9098`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)
* Add experimental support for range predicate pushdown on string columns. It can be enabled

>     by setting the `postgresql.experimental.enable-string-pushdown-with-collate` catalog configuration

Reviewer 6: Fix indentation

    property or the corresponding `enable_string_pushdown_with_collate` session property to `true`. ({issue}`9746`)

## Redshift connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## SQL Server connector

* Add support for [truncating tables](/sql/truncate). ({issue}`8921`)

## SPI

> * Collect connector metrics after ``ConnectorPageSource`` is closed. ({issue}`9615`)

Reviewer 6: Single backticks

Reviewer 6: This seems like more of a bug fix and should probably go in general
